HARI SREENIVASAN: Good evening.
I'm Hari Sreenivasan.
Judy Woodruff is away.
On the "NewsHour" tonight: Paris
attack.
A gunman opens fire on police
just three days
before the French elections.
Also ahead: Exxon seeks a waiver
to do business
in Russia.
Are the Trump administration's
business ties
impacting their decisions?
Plus: news divisions -- how a
politically
divided nation gets its news.
KEN BLOCK, Independent: I guess
there was
an element of distrust.
As citizens, we don't know what
we don't know.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Plus: the
turbulent business
of the airline industry, record
profits, expanding
routes, and in some cases bad
service.
All that and more on tonight's
"PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
HARI SREENIVASAN: Paris is on
high alert again,
after a gunman killed one
policeman and wounded
two more, before being killed
himself.
The attack came just three days
before voting
starts in France's presidential
election.
The sitting president, Francois
Hollande,
said all indications are that it
was terror-related.
Authorities sealed off the area
after the
incident on the famed Champs
Elysees.
It happened near a subway
station in an area
popular with tourists.
MAN (through translator): It was
a terrorist.
He came out with a Kalashnikov
and started
shooting.
He could've shot us on the
pavement and killed
more people with a spray of
shots, but he
targeted the policemen.
HARI SREENIVASAN: In Washington,
President
Trump called the killings a
terrible thing
and said it looks like another
terrorist attack.
We get more now from special
correspondent
Malcolm Brabant, who's in Paris.
He spoke with us moments ago via
Skype.
Malcolm, what's the latest that
we know?
MALCOLM BRABANT: The latest
information we
have is that the Islamic State
(INAUDIBLE)
is now claiming responsibility
for this attack
in the Champs Elysees.
At least, they're claiming
responsibility
here a couple hours after this
gunman opened
fire with what we believe was a
Kalashnikov
on police officers who were
sitting in a van
near the Champs Elysees, which
is this main
boulevard that goes through
Paris.
The latest information that we
have is that
one policemen have been killed,
two have been
wounded.
The gunman himself was shot
dead.
But he was known to the
authorities.
The police have been carrying
out a raid on
his home to find out more
information.
The French president, Francois
Hollande, has
also called a meeting of his
security chiefs
to work out what the
implications are for
this attack.
And it's of utmost importance
for this country,
because it's going to the polls
in three days'
time, and tensions are extremely
high.
HARI SREENIVASAN: That's two
sort of important
pieces of context here, that,
one, is that
there was a thwarted attack just
a little
while ago.
And you were actually out with
one of the
candidates at a rally when that
happened.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Yes.
There was a raid on a couple of
men in Marseille.
The police were made aware that
an attack
was imminent, and they arrested
two Islamists
who had proclaimed loyalty to
the Islamic
State.
They seized a bunch of weapons,
a whole load
of ammunition, and some homemade
explosives.
And they may have been going
into court.
And the fear was that they were
going to attack
one of the candidates.
At the time that these arrests
were made,
I was down in the city of Dijon,
where Jean-Luc
Melenchon, the hard-left
candidate, was speaking.
And what he was trying to say to
French people
was that these people were
criminals, that
people shouldn't be afraid, that
there should
be vigorous debate, and that the
freedom of
the French people shouldn't be
impinged by
this.
But, nevertheless, this
particular shooting,
and also those arrests in
Marseille have shown
that the Islamists are serious,
that they
perhaps want to disrupt this
election process.
And so that's going to be making
people extremely
nervous on Sunday, when they go
to put their
ballots in the boxes.
But the police and the army are
basically
saying that there will be about
50,000 people
out on the streets of Paris
alone to try to
make sure that this election
goes off as smoothly
as possible.
HARI SREENIVASAN: All right,
Malcolm Brabant
joining via Skype from Paris
tonight, thanks
so much.
In the day's other news: The
president renewed
his attack on Iran and the
nuclear deal struck
in 2015.
At a White House news conference
with Italy's
prime minister, he called it a
terrible agreement
and sharply criticized Tehran.
DONALD TRUMP, President of the
United States:
They are not living up to the
spirit of the
agreement.
I can tell you that.
And we're analyzing it very,
very carefully.
And we will have something to
say about it
in the not-too-distant future.
But Iran has not lived up to the
spirit of
the agreement, and they have to
do that.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Earlier this
week, the administration
told Congress that Iran is
complying, at least
technically, with the terms of
the deal.
In Russia, the Supreme Court
today banned
the Jehovah's Witnesses after
the government
labeled them an extremist group.
Russia is home to more than
170,000 Jehovah's
Witnesses.
They have been the target of a
crackdown,
but they say they will appeal
the court's
decision.
Human Rights Watch calls it a
blow to religious
freedoms in Russia.
General Motors has halted
operations in Venezuela
after its factory there was
seized by the
socialist government.
It's the latest in a series of
such incidents.
In a statement, the automaker
said it strongly
rejects the arbitrary measures
and will vigorously
take all legal actions to defend
its rights.
Vice President Pence today
praised Indonesia
as a land of democracy and
tolerance, in the
latest stop on his Asian tour.
He held talks with President
Joko Widodo in
Jakarta, and said the world's
most populous
Muslim nation is an inspiration
to the world.
MIKE PENCE, Vice President of
the United States:
As the second and third largest
democracies
in the world, our two countries
share many
common values, including
freedom, the rule
of law, human rights, and
religious diversity.
The United States is proud to
partner with
Indonesia to promote and protect
these values,
the birthright of all people.
HARI SREENIVASAN: The visit came
a day after
Islamic conservatives in Jakarta
defeated
the minority Christian governor
in his reelection
bid.
He's already on trial for
blasphemy against
the Koran.
Back in this country, more than
21,000 drug
convictions are being thrown out
in Massachusetts.
The state's highest court
formally approved
the move today, the largest
single dismissal
in American history.
A former state drug lab chemist
had been accused
of tampering with evidence and
falsifying
drug tests.
President Trump has ordered an
investigation
into whether imported steel from
China and
elsewhere is hurting national
security.
He signed the directive with
executives from
U.S. steelmakers looking on.
The results of the probe could
let him curb
steel imports under a 1960s
trade law.
And on Wall Street, stocks
rallied on upbeat
earnings reports.
The Dow Jones industrial average
gained 174
points to close at 20578.
The Nasdaq rose 53 points, and
the S&P 500
added 17.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
business
ties between the Trump
administration and
large corporations; the Russia
file -- documents
reveal Russian plans to
influence the 2016
U.S. election; news divisions,
stark contrasts
between where conservative and
liberal Americans
get their news; and much more.
Now: how behind-the-scenes moves
by a pair
of corporate giants are raising
red flags
about the Trump administration.
Companies routinely advocate and
lobby every
day on behalf of their business
and shareholders.
Sometimes, those matters are not
just about
corporate profits, but also
about the economic
livelihoods of workers and
communities.
But moves by ExxonMobil and Dow
Chemical are
fueling scrutiny about the
corporate influence
within the Trump administration.
April 2012, Rex Tillerson, then
CEO of ExxonMobil,
visits Moscow, wrapping up a
deal with the
Russian state oil company
Rosneft.
It calls for investing up to
$500 billion
to hunt for oil in the Arctic
Ocean and Black
Sea.
REX TILLERSON, U.S. Secretary of
State: I
would like to thank you for the
warm welcome,
and it is a historic day for
ExxonMobil and
Rosneft.
HARI SREENIVASAN: But two years
later, the
drilling venture was blocked,
when the U.S.
imposed sanctions on Russia over
its annexation
of Crimea from Ukraine.
Now ExxonMobil is asking the
Trump administration
to let the Black Sea part of the
project go
forward.
Tillerson, in his new role as
secretary of
state, says he will do just as
he promised
during his confirmation hearing.
REX TILLERSON: As to any issues
involving
ExxonMobil that might come
before me if confirmed
as secretary of state, I would
recuse myself
from those issues.
HARI SREENIVASAN: But his past
ties to ExxonMobil
mean the request is certain to
draw extra
scrutiny.
Moreover, Russia's meddling in
the 2016 election
remains a hot issue in
Washington.
Republican Senator John McCain
of Arizona,
for one, voiced disbelief about
the news yesterday.
In a tweet, he asked: "Are they
crazy?"
At the same time, Dow Chemical
is asking the
new administration not to impose
new curbs
on three widely used
insecticides.
They are diazinon, malathion and
chlorpyrifos.
The Associated Press reports Dow
and two other
manufacturers want the
government to set aside
federal studies that found the
chemicals may
be harmful to about 1,800
threatened or endangered
species.
The companies argue the studies
are fundamentally
flawed.
Environmental advocates say
there's no such
thing as perfect lab conditions.
BRETT HARTL, Center for
Biological Diversity:
You can't just take an
endangered fish, an
endangered salmon out of the
wild, take it
to the lab and then expose it to
enough pesticides
until it dies to get that sort
of data you
need.
It's wrong morally.
It's illegal.
HARI SREENIVASAN: The
Environmental Protection
Agency says only that it's
reviewing petitions
as they come in, giving careful
consideration
to sound science and good
policy-making.
As with Exxon, Dow's influence
will be an
issue.
The company contributed a
million dollars
to President Trump's inaugural
activities.
And, in February, when Mr. Trump
signed an
executive order on rolling back
regulations,
Dow's CEO was at his side.
Let's look into some of the
questions being
raised about each of these
examples.
Jay Solomon broke the news about
ExxonMobil
in The Wall Street Journal.
And Norman Eisen is a former
special counsel
to President Obama.
His expertise is government
ethics.
He's now a fellow at the
Brookings Institution.
Jay, let me start with you.
Why does Exxon want this?
JAY SOLOMON, The Wall Street
Journal: Well,
basically, the Arctic and the
Black Sea are
kind of one the most
sought-after kind of
pioneer spots for oil
exploration.
And, you know, for their future
earnings,
for the growth of the business,
this is seen
as kind of one of the last great
places to
explore.
HARI SREENIVASAN: How much money
are we talking
about here?
How significant is this
potential?
JAY SOLOMON: I mean, President
Putin, when
they announced the deal in 2012,
said it could
be as much as $500 billion in
investment,
and huge amounts of oil and gas
is in that
region.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Is it typical
for these
types of exceptions to be asked
for?
Is it sometimes on humanitarian
grounds or
other reasons?
JAY SOLOMON: There are.
If you look in Iran or Burma, as
the Obama
administration was kind of
pursuing their
policies, there were exemptions
granted for
humanitarian or technology
reasons.
But an issue like this that is
politically
charged with this much money
with a country
like Russia, it's pretty unusual
that you
would see a waiver granted in
this situation.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Rex Tillerson,
former secretary
-- or former head of Exxon, now
the secretary
of state, he has recused himself
for two years.
Right?
JAY SOLOMON: Yes, he has.
I mean, ultimately, the decision
on the waiver
is made by an office in the
Treasury Department,
but because of the national
security and foreign
policy implications, the State
Department,
probably some of the
intelligence agencies,
it's a broader issue.
But, obviously, when Tillerson
got this job,
the question was immediately
asked, you know,
how will your previous job
impact the issue
of Exxon?
And it's tricky, and already you
see Republicans
and Democrats saying, not just
because of
Tillerson, but because of the
concerns about
Russia's hacking of the election
and the other
investigations, that this is not
going to
get political support.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Norm Eisen,
what about the
idea that Rex Tillerson has said
he will recuse
himself for this?
Isn't that the kind of safeguard
that we have
in place to make sure that
nothing untoward
happens?
NORMAN EISEN, Former Special
Counsel to President
Obama: Well, I think it's
important that Mr.
Tillerson recuse himself.
And he is to be applauded for
doing that and
for making a complete break with
Exxon.
But that doesn't solve all the
problems here.
Exxon gave $500,000 to Mr.
Trump's inaugural.
There's an enormous cloud around
Russia, not
just the violations of national
borders and
sovereignty that led to these
sanctions, but
also the violations of our
democratic norms.
There can be no doubt that they
interfered
in the election.
The only question now is whether
Mr. Trump
or those around him knew of it
or were involved
in it.
So, granting a sanctions waiver
here just
is not called for.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Norm Eisen, I
mean, a lot
of times, it's the proximity and
the adjacency
of facts that ends up leading us
to different
conclusions.
Until there is some sort of
smoking gun or
a trail of evidence, are we
prejudging?
速MD-BO /NORMAN EISEN: Well, I
think it's
very important not to prejudge,
but at the
same time, it's clear now,
there's a consensus,
an intelligence community
consensus.
We have just seen documents from
a government
think tank in Russia
demonstrating an interference
in our elections, what we can
describe as
an act of gray war by doing
this.
It's an extraordinary hostility
against the
United States.
And there's substantial
indications that there
have been contacts by those who
were in and
around Mr. Trump.
There's very substantial
evidence that raises
serious questions here, and that
goes to the
political climate for this
sanctions waiver.
I don't think it's going to be
granted.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Jay Solomon,
you mentioned
this a little bit, the political
climate here.
What kind of support or lack of
support is
there when you have, say,
Senator McCain tweeting,
"Are you crazy?" in the case of
Exxon?
JAY SOLOMON: No, I think it's
tough.
I think Exxon's argument is, you
know, we
have to basically start drilling
by the end
of this year, or we're going to
lose this
concession, and if we don't get
it, the European
companies that are already
starting to mobilize
in this area, they have been
granted some
waivers from the European Union
to pursue
this.
So, you know, if we don't get,
it's going
to be developed, you know,
anyway, and then
American jobs and money is going
to be hurt.
That's what they're going to
argue.
But I also agree, it's going to
be very difficult
to gin up political support in
an environment
where Russia, whether it's the
hacking or
the accusations of collusion or
Ukraine, it's
just they have not given
President Trump anything
to work with either, the
Russians.
So, I agree.
I think it would be very
difficult for the
Trump administration to get
political support.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Norm Eisen, do
you have
different concerns about the
issues with Dow?
速MD-BO /NORMAN EISEN: Well,
mercifully, Dow
is not accused of any improper
assault on
our democracy.
But we do have an even larger
political contribution
to the Trump inauguration, $1
million from
Dow.
You have the Dow CEO, who is
seen at Mr. Trump's
side.
He has extraordinary access in
the White House,
chairs a group that advises Mr.
Trump, was
there when Mr. Trump signed his
executive
order relating to cutting back
regulation.
And now you have Dow's request
to set aside
the science -- the U.S.
government has made
scientific findings about these
速MD-BO /organophosphates
and the harms they cause to --
set aside that
science and relieve regulation.
It doesn't smell right.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Norm Eisen,
how different
is this from the revolving door
that people
so hate about Washington, that
people come
right out of government, go
right into the
private sector, and then
oftentimes right
back in if the administration
changes?
速MD-BO /NORMAN EISEN: Well, the
problem with
the Trump White House is that
they removed
the revolving door and just
threw it open,
and it's being flooded with
corporate executives
who are coming in with
lobbyists.
They removed the lobbying ban
that President
Obama had in his ethics
executive order.
And everybody believes that
business has to
have a seat at the table, has to
be on a level
table, though.
The problem is, it appears that
the table
is tilted to disproportionately
favor business
as a special interest, beyond
the public interest,
and so that is worrying.
It's in a way worse than the
revolving door.
HARI SREENIVASAN: All right,
Norm Eisen of
the Brookings Institution and
Jay Solomon
from The Wall Street Journal,
thank you both.
JAY SOLOMON: Thank you.
HARI SREENIVASAN: There is news
in the Russia
file.
New documents reveal plans for
Russia to influence
the U.S. presidential election.
William Brangham has that
report.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Reuters
reported today that
a think tank controlled by the
Russian government
outlined detailed plans how to
swing the 2016
U.S. election toward Donald
Trump.
In two different papers, the
think tank said
Russia should use social media
and Russian-backed
media to bolster Trump and to
undermine faith
in America's electoral system.
For more on these developments,
I'm joined
now by Ned Parker -- he's one of
the reporters
who broke the story -- and by
John Sipher.
He served 28 years in the CIA's
clandestine
service, stationed in Russia and
Eastern Europe.
He's now with the consulting
firm CrossLead.
Gentlemen, welcome to you both.
Ned Parker, I would like to
start with you.
Can you tell us a little bit
more?
What is it that you found?
What did you report today?
NED PARKER, Reuters: Right.
Well, we found are that there
are two documents
drafted by an in-house policy
shop for the
Kremlin that reports back to
President Vladimir
Putin.
And this organization is also
headed by former
foreign intelligence service
officers.
This organization called the
Russian Institute
for Strategic Studies drafted
two reports
last year, one in June and one
in October.
The first in June talked about,
how do you
influence the U.S. electorate
through a media
and social media campaign to
overturn the
policies of then-President Obama
and promote
-- persuade the U.S. public to
chose a new
U.S. administration that would
promote policies
beneficial to both Russia and
the United States?
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: And, Ned, just
staying with
you for a second, is this
evidence, is this
in line with what U.S.
intelligence agencies
believe the Russians did, in
fact, do during
the election?
NED PARKER: Right.
I think that's the significance
of these documents.
They came in after the election.
The second document, which is
from October,
talked about how Hillary Clinton
was likely
to win the election, so it made
sense to change
tack in terms of propaganda, and
rather than
work for her defeat and a new
administration
under Donald Trump, instead,
they should push
for a weak Clinton
administration, and to
bring question about the
integrity of the
U.S. electoral process through
different media
and social media information
packets.
Now, getting these two documents
after the
election, it sort of
crystallized what the
U.S. already knew about motive
and intent,
including the hacking, for
instance, which
there was forensics all over the
place linking
the hacking of the DNC and the
Clinton campaign
to Russia's military
intelligence.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: John Sipher,
you worked
in Russia.
You worked against the Russians
and with the
Russians.
Does this then conform to your
understanding
of how they operate?
JOHN SIPHER, Former CIA Officer:
Well, certainly,
it does.
And this institute was actually
an internal
part of the SVR, the former KGB.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: This is not
some separate
think tank, like we would think
of in the
U.S.?
JOHN SIPHER: No, it was an
internal sort of
analytical unit, which then
separated and
tied itself to the presidential
administration,
headed by longtime-serving KGB
officers.
In fact, the head of it now was
in fact the
head of the SVR, which is their
external intelligence
service.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Is this the
kind of evidence,
John Sipher, that gave U.S.
intelligence agencies
the confidence to say, we think
Russia did
meddle in the election?
JOHN SIPHER: I think this is
another piece
in that puzzle certainly.
I don't think it's a big
surprise.
President Putin hardly needed
this group to
tell him by June of 2016 that he
should start
trying to influence the election
or to, you
know, find a candidate that was
pro-Russian,
when we already by that time,
all of us sort
of knew that.
However, I think the -- I do
think this is
part and parcel of a longer
effort that we
see now in Europe.
So, the Russians are now trying
to influence
elections in Germany and Russia
and in Bulgaria.
And, in fact, Mr. Reshetnikov,
who ran this
institute, is tied to possible
efforts to
assassinate the Montenegrin
prime minister
in Montenegro.
And that may be, in fact, why he
lost his
job in January.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Ned Parker, in
these two
documents, as you have
discovered them, was
there any mention of WikiLeaks
or the computer
hacking that intelligence
agencies also believe
the Russians were involved in?
NED PARKER: No, there is no
mention of WikiLeaks
or the hacking, but I think you
have to see
these as they were described to
myself and
my colleagues, John Walcott and
Jon Landay.
They were described as part and
parcel of
a campaign.
So, the Kremlin is a very
top-down, authoritarian
culture.
So when these documents passed
around, they
only reinforced what everyone
knew to do.
So, when you actually started to
see the WikiLeaks
dumps happening, the
Russian-affiliated media
outlets, like U.S. -- like
Russia Today and
Sputnik and the troll factories
outside of
St. Petersburg that pump news
out on Twitter
and other outlets on the
Internet, they were
able to amplify the voice and
the reach of
the hacked, stolen materials
from the Clinton
campaign and DNC.
So, they reinforced each other.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: John Sipher,
is it really
that easy for the Russian
government to say,
you three news agencies, start
pumping out
stories that are anti-Clinton or
pro-Trump?
Is that -- does it work that
obviously?
JOHN SIPHER: It's funny because,
in my time
in government, especially in the
last years,
we often talked about an
all-of-government
approach, so, if we're going
into Afghanistan,
all of our agencies and
institutes had to
work together.
We have never been quite as good
at it as
the Russians, because that's a
centralized
state.
And the intelligence services,
from which
Mr. Putin came, were the central
sword and
shield of the government.
And, therefore, yes, they do a
very good job
of a coordinated approach to use
diplomatic,
intelligence, military and
political power
as one.
So, I'm not surprised at all by
this.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Ned, you heard
John mention
earlier that the concern
obviously is that
the Russians, they did it to us
back in 2016.
We have elections coming up in
France and
elsewhere in Europe.
Did the intelligence officials
that you talked
with for this reporting, did
they give you
any sense that they believe that
the Russians
are going to be involved in
those elections
as well?
NED PARKER: I think that's sort
of -- it's
an open secret.
Right?
You look at France, and Marine
Le Pen makes
no secret of her affection for
Russia.
So, I think that's seen as part
and parcel
for the course.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: John Sipher,
one last question
before you go.
I understanding there is --
there's also reporting
about a mole hunt that is going
on within
the CIA right now.
From your time in the CIA, what
can you tell
us about that?
JOHN SIPHER: Yes, that's
unfortunate.
Any organization or enterprise
has to worry
about the insider threat and
this type of
thing happening, to include the
CIA.
In my time in government, I have
seen, and
we have caught spies, like
Aldrich Ames and
Hanssen at the FBI.
Almost always in that case, it
is an intelligence
source of ours that lead us to
find out who
that person is.
So, I wish them the best of luck
in figuring
this out, and hopefully they can
find out
who it is before too long,
certainly.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: All right,
John Sipher,
Ned Parker of Reuters, thank you
both very
much for being here.
JOHN SIPHER: Thanks.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour":
Making Sense
of the airline industry's
turbulent business;
a new title from the "NewsHour"
Bookshelf,
"Locking Up Our Own: Crime and
Punishment
in Black America"; and a Brief
But Spectacular
take on discovering yourself.
But first: The ouster of Bill
O'Reilly from
the FOX News Channel is an
earthquake inside
the conservative news media
machine that many
say, over the years, has
contributed to the
polarization of America.
Tonight, we look at one aspect
of the two
Americas what we're calling news
divisions.
White House correspondent John
Yang went to
Arizona recently to examine how
people get
their news and the impact that
has on how
they see the world.
JOHN YANG: Marcus Huey, Ken
Block, and Delia
Salvatierra all live in the
Phoenix area and
call themselves news junkies.
But that's where the similarity
ends.
Their sources of news are as
different as
their politics.
Salvatierra is a Democrat who
voted for Hillary
Clinton.
DELIA SALVATIERRA, Democrat: The
New York
Times, The Washington Post, CNN,
and "The
New Yorker" are sort of the
foundational things
that I surround myself with.
JOHN YANG: Huey is a Republican
who voted
for President Trump.
MARCUS HUEY, Republican: As a
voting member
of the Republican Party, I would
say anything
that comes out of FOX, I pretty
much take
to the bank.
If something comes from Laura
Ingraham, I
pretty much take that to the
bank.
JOHN YANG: And Block, an
independent, voted
for Libertarian candidate Gary
Johnson.
KEN BLOCK, Independent: I kind
of bounce all
over the board.
I have Twitter and a news feed
on my phone.
So, you know, I take a little
bit of everything.
JOHN YANG: None of that
surprises Thom Reilly,
director of the nonpartisan
Morrison Institute
for Public Policy at Arizona
State University.
He's one of the authors of new a
study examining
where voters get both news and
commentary.
THOM REILLY, Director, Morrison
Institute
for Public Policy: Well, voters
today basically
have this cafeteria type format,
where they
can choose from personalized
news sources
that not only serves to inform
them, but also
reinforces their world view.
We want to hear stuff that we
believe in,
or just kind of particularly in
a very polarized
world.
So, I do think we're seeing
this, people going
back to what -- they feel safe.
JOHN YANG: The researchers found
that the
proliferation of news sources on
cable TV
and the Internet has upended the
relationship
between news outlets and their
audiences.
Instead of voters being shaped
by news, Reilly
says news is being shaped for
voters.
THOM REILLY: What we're seeing
is that, particularly
with a lot of Internet sources,
is they're
appealing to a base, and they're
attracting
a wide audience, and it's
growing.
And they're responding to what
voters want,
instead of vice versa.
JOHN YANG: It used to be that
politicians
and candidates would appeal to a
base, but
now you're saying that news
outlets are appealing
to their base?
THOM REILLY: And they're shaping
it, yes,
yes.
JOHN YANG: Democrat Salvatierra
grew up in
a conservative Republican
household and found
her own brand of politics in
college at the
University of California,
Berkeley.
She now runs her own immigration
and criminal
law practice.
DELIA SALVATIERRA: I think the
press has become
increasingly important.
And I think once the new
administration attacked
certain organizations as fake
news, it only
empowered me to listen to those
news organizations
even more.
And whereas before I could flip
back and forth
between maybe FOX News and CNN,
I don't trust
FOX News, because it is so
overwhelmingly
endorsed by the administration.
JOHN YANG: But you're
deliberately seeking
out opinions, commentary that
reinforce your
views?
DELIA SALVATIERRA: Yes, I think
so.
I think I do that naturally.
I wish that I could tolerate
watching FOX
News a little bit more, but I
can't, because
it's usually the same time that
I'm watching
Anderson Cooper or Don Lemon,
and they're
asking questions.
They're asking legitimate
questions.
They're pushing the envelope.
And they're asking the questions
that I have,
that are aligned with my views.
JOHN YANG: Huey, the Republican,
is a retired
small business owner.
He and his wife, Lorri (ph),
view the world
through a very different news
prism.
MARCUS HUEY: I try to get up a
little bit
before 7:00 -- 7:00, I'm in the
breakfast
room.
I have FOX News on.
I have The Wall Street Journal
down in front
of me, and then I have my iPhone
next to me.
And if there's no breaking,
urgent news on
the TV, then the first thing I
do is, I will
go check my phone, and look
through my Facebook
wall to see anything that I
might have missed
through the night.
JOHN YANG: You said whatever you
hear from
Laura Ingraham and from FOX, you
feel pretty
much -- you feel confident in?
MARCUS HUEY: I have a track
record and history
with them.
And I feel they both have been
reliable and
haven't really let me down that
often.
Breitbart, I feel good about it,
but if it's
some kind of a startling
headline, I might
hold back and look for other
opinions.
CNN and MSNBC, I feel it may not
be fake news,
but I feel that those
organizations, unfortunately,
I think they would like to see
Trump be a
one-term president.
JOHN YANG: Block, an Uber and
Lyft driver,
says he voted Libertarian last
year as a default.
KEN BLOCK: The thing I'm most
pleased with
is the fact that Hillary Clinton
didn't get
in the White House.
That was my concern.
I couldn't vote for Trump at the
time, no,
and I don't know if I could now.
JOHN YANG: A self-described
cynic, Block grew
up in a Democratic household and
became the
black sheep Republican.
With what he calls the recent
political circus,
he declared himself an
independent.
While he drives, he prefers a
right-leaning
talk radio station.
At home, he watches CNN and NBC
News in the
morning and at dinner time.
His smartphone, with his Twitter
account,
is never far away.
He is an equal-opportunity
critic when it
comes to some of the news
sources most frequently
mentioned by voters in the
Arizona State Morrison
Institute study.
Who do you distrust the most?
KEN BLOCK: Wolf Blitzer.
JOHN YANG: Why?
KEN BLOCK: He has just become
more of a grandstander
than anything else.
Everything is breaking news,
every day, every
moment.
Everything can't be breaking
news.
It's not possible.
JOHN YANG: Do you watch FOX?
KEN BLOCK: Not so much anymore.
I used to.
I felt that was one-sided, more
so than the
combination of all the other
outlets.
And I guess there was an element
of distrust.
As citizens, we don't know what
we don't know.
We're only given so much
information.
JOHN YANG: How do these three
voters, with
their selected sources for news,
view one
current big story?
Do you believe that the Russians
tried to
interfere with the election?
DELIA SALVATIERRA: Has suspicion
around this
issue remained?
Absolutely.
MARCUS HUEY: Do I believe they
tried to influence
the election for Donald Trump?
That seems like a stretch.
You have the Clintons, who have
received tens
of millions of dollars, either
through -- personally
or through their foundation,
from the Russians.
In my mind, I would think that,
if Putin has
somebody he would be cheering
for, it would
be Hillary Clinton.
KEN BLOCK: I believe that they
did.
I don't know if it's to the
extent they are
being accused of, but I believe
that they
did.
JOHN YANG: The Arizona State
Morrison study
found that independents like
Block can help
bridge the alternative realities
of polarized
partisans.
THOM REILLY: If you talk to
different people,
and you're open to different
ideas, that perhaps
on a larger national scale can
lead to more
compromise.
JOHN YANG: As he drives his
customers, Block
says sometimes the best way to
get along is
simply to change the channel.
KEN BLOCK: A lot of times, my
customers have
just gotten off a plane, and
they will hear
something that just happened,
and, oh, turn
it up, turn it up, turn it up.
Or, conversely, they will say, I
have been
listening to that all day.
Can you please turn that off?
Can we have some music?
JOHN YANG: If they can agree on
that.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm John
Yang in Phoenix.
HARI SREENIVASAN: The airline
industry and
its business model have been in
the crosshairs
of late, particularly since the
United Airlines
story captured worldwide
attention.
Many travelers have been asking,
how do airlines
make money, and do those profits
come at the
expense of passenger comfort and
convenience?
Our economics correspondent,
Paul Solman,
has been exploring the turbulent
business
of aviation.
It's part of his weekly
reporting on Making
Sense of economic news.
WOMAN: Oh, my God!
WOMAN: Oh, my God.
PAUL SOLMAN: The whole world was
watching,
watching United Airlines last
week, as its
skies proved a lot less friendly
than advertised.
But a flight we took recently
had a much happier
ending: No passenger was
bloodied and dragged
from the plane, which took off
from tiny Windsor
Locks, Connecticut, and landed
barely five
hours later in Dublin, Ireland,
for an affordable
$549 round-trip, including
four-day hotel
stay for some of the passengers.
There's a larger theme of our
story, however,
that an industry notorious for
losing money
has been making it, hand over
fist, at the
expense of often helpless
consumers, but that
competition may be on the verge
of rescuing
us at long last.
STEPHEN KAVANAGH, CEO, Aer
Lingus: The president
was kind enough to put knots in
this twine.
PAUL SOLMAN: Aer Lingus CEO
Stephen Kavanagh
keeps an old globe gifted to his
predecessor
in the 1960s by the president of
Ireland.
STEPHEN KAVANAGH: The first knot
being based
in Ireland, and the second knot
was the technical
range of aircraft at the time.
And his ambition was that
Ireland would become
a gateway point.
And 50 years later, we believe
we're delivering
on that ambition.
PAUL SOLMAN: Now, Aer Lingus
wasn't exactly
a cash cow as a government
service.
Aer Lingus was owned by the
Irish government
up until when?
STEPHEN KAVANAGH: 2006.
PAUL SOLMAN: And it lost money
in all that
time, right?
STEPHEN KAVANAGH: Yes.
Well, most of the time, yes.
PAUL SOLMAN: When I told
sophisticated business
people that I was doing this
story, they said,
oh, airlines, an industry that
always in the
end loses money.
So, are you just in a up phase
of what eventually
is going to be a down industry?
STEPHEN KAVANAGH: There's no
doubt that the
business is cyclical.
And there's no doubt that that
industry over
many years has had difficulty in
returning
its cost of capital to
shareholders.
PAUL SOLMAN: By difficulty, you
mean it hasn't.
STEPHEN KAVANAGH: It hasn't.
PAUL SOLMAN: But smaller,
fuel-efficient planes
can now reach well beyond the
knot on that
1960s string.
Indeed, these are boom times for
airlines,
and not just Aer Lingus.
What explains the turnaround?
The answer demands a bit of
ancient history
and ancient footage as well.
For decades, governments,
including the U.S.,
strictly regulated fares and
routes, if they
didn't own the carriers
outright.
Fares worldwide were high,
routes plentiful,
planes often half-empty.
But profits were rare to
nonexistent.
Then, in 1977, President Jimmy
Carter anointed
Cornell economist Alfred Kahn to
deregulate.
ALFRED KAHN, Economist: It's the
greatest
thing I ever did in my life,
other than have
children.
(LAUGHTER)
PAUL SOLMAN: Kahn thought market
forces would
bring air travel to all.
He didn't worry much about
profits.
When I visited him in Ithaca,
New York, in
2003, he was proud of his
legacy.
ALFRED KAHN: What I did has been
extraordinarily
beneficial to millions and
millions and millions
of people every year who
couldn't afford to
travel, who now can visit their
grandparents,
which now strikes home to me, go
home for
vacation from college, who can
travel and
indeed can be tourists.
PAUL SOLMAN: But a key part of
Kahn's plan
never materialized: antitrust
enforcement.
Thus, deregulation spurred a
wave of mergers,
speeded up when business was
walloped by 9/11
and then the crash of '08.
Bankruptcies abounded.
Today, the U.S. fleet has shrunk
to just four
main carriers, which control 80
percent-plus
of the U.S. market.
No wonder passengers are at the
mercy of the
major airlines: flights
jam-packed, routes
slashed, service to smaller
airports dumped.
Yes, fares have dipped, but
costs have dipped
more, thanks to new planes,
cheap fuel, do-it-ourselves
software, and union work
outsourced to contract
workers.
Meanwhile, fees have so
metastasized here
in the U.S., one low-cost
airline now differentiates
itself by mocking them.
ACTOR: Is this your first
flight?
NARRATOR: On Southwest Airlines,
we don't
charge fees for stuff that
should be free.
PAUL SOLMAN: U.S. airlines alone
made an estimated
$20 billion last year.
Fees accounted for an estimated
$3.8 billion,
itinerary change charges another
$3 billion.
Selling miles to credit card
companies has
been estimated to bring in
upwards of $10
billion more.
Hey, even Southwest is now under
pressure
to impose fees to increase
profits.
In justifying the profits of Aer
Lingus, which
itself has merged with British
Airways and
Iberia, CEO Kavanagh might as
well be speaking
for the industry as a whole: It
has achieved
greater efficiency.
So, your story is: We finally
figured out
how to do it right.
Is that true?
STEPHEN KAVANAGH: We have
figured out what
you need to manage.
KEVIN DILLON, Executive
Director, Connecticut
Airport Authority: Airlines are
extremely
profitable at this juncture.
PAUL SOLMAN: Kevin Dillon runs
Connecticut's
Airport Authority.
With only four carriers
dominating the domestic
market, he has to pay to bring
new business
to his underserved airport.
KEVIN DILLON: Our passengers out
of this catchment
area for many, many years have
driven down
to New York or driven up to
Logan.
PAUL SOLMAN: Connecticut offered
$13 million
dollars in cash and guarantees.
But they still had to bribe you
to get you
to do this.
DECLAN KEARNEY, Director of
Communications,
Aer Lingus: Well, but if what
you're referring
to is that we're getting support
from the
airport and from Connecticut,
yes, it's helpful,
as was we put a lot of
commercial risk into
launching a route.
The fact that they would share
some of the
risk, we think is totally fair.
PAUL SOLMAN: Aer Lingus
spokesman Declan Kearney
stressed that the company too is
making an
investment, $50 million in
equipment, crew
and fuel costs, promotion.
But the bottom line is that the
profits from
overbooked flights, infuriating
fees and cheaper
costs are luring competitors
once more.
We first reported this torrent
of competition
last year, when no-frills
Norwegian Airlines
began flying to the balmy isle
of Guadeloupe
from New York and Boston for
$69.
Norwegian is about to start
flying to Scotland
from Connecticut, as we flew
affordably to
Dublin.
As we enjoy a brief pub
interlude, remember
the advantages of competition on
flights to
Dublin or anywhere else: low
fares, no fees,
comfy planes from which no one
is in danger
of forcible removal, because of
the profits
that beckon.
And one last time, why the
profits?
Two main reasons, claims Aer
Lingus CEO Kavanagh.
STEPHEN KAVANAGH: That there has
been some
level of consolidation in North
America, where
it's possible for airlines as
businesses to
generate sustainable levels of
profitability.
And the other is, capital is
more disciplined
as to where it's deployed.
PAUL SOLMAN: Investors are more
disciplined,
he means, in that they now
demand immediate
profits, or simply sell their
airline stocks.
But maybe the discipline in
North America
is just consolidation, right?
I mean, it may be that if there
were more
vigorous pursuit of antitrust in
America,
you would have more competitors
competing
on price, and then airlines
wouldn't be making
any money again.
Kavanagh's answer to this
question may be
the moral of this story.
STEPHEN KAVANAGH: That is
undeniably true.
If you have full freedom of
access to a market,
where capital is cheap, where
there isn't
a discipline of a return, then
that isn't
a stable market.
And, in airlines, no business in
that type
of environment is capable of
generating sustainable
return.
PAUL SOLMAN: Which would suggest
that, once
competition hits full-throttle,
consumers
may then again be flying high,
while the airline
industry will be coming back
down to earth.
For the "PBS NewsHour," Paul
Solman, reporting
from Dublin, Ireland, and 15
miles north of
Hartford, Connecticut.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Now: race,
crime and imprisonment.
That's the focus of the newest
addition to
the "NewsHour" Bookshelf.
Jeffrey Brown has that.
JEFFREY BROWN: Mass
incarceration and its
devastating effect on black
Americans and
neighborhoods, it's a subject
that's attracted
much attention in books and
policy circles
in the last decade.
A new take on the issue comes in
the book
"Locking Up Our Own: Crime and
Punishment
in Black America," based in part
on the experience
of author James Forman Jr. as a
public defender
in Washington, D.C. Forman is
now a professor
at Yale Law School and joins me
now
Welcome to you.
JAMES FORMAN JR., Author,
"Locking Up Our
Own: Crime and Punishment in
Black America":
Thank you.
JEFFREY BROWN: Let me pick up on
that experience
of being a public defender.
What did you see there that made
you rethink
the story of mass incarceration?
JAMES FORMAN JR.: Well, I went
into the job
because I viewed this as the
civil rights
issue of my generation, one in
three black
men under criminal justice
supervision.
And when I got to local courts
of Washington,
D.C., what I saw was case after
case with
African-American judges,
prosecutors, bailiffs.
D.C. has a significant
African-American representation
in operation of this criminal
justice system.
And that system was very harsh.
I had one case where a judge
before locking
up my client lectured him on
Martin Luther
King.
He said, Martin Luther King
fought and died
for your generation to be free,
and you're
out here messing it up, carrying
a gun, getting
high, disrespecting your family
and the neighborhood.
So, that's the thing that really
told me there
was a story here.
JEFFREY BROWN: You know, a
number of books
and thinkers have looked as this
over the
last number of years, mass
incarceration through
the lens on institutional
racism, right, even
a continuation of the history of
slavery in
this country.
Are you challenging the story,
filling it
in?
What do you see yourself doing
here?
JAMES FORMAN JR.: No, I think
that story is
correct and powerful and urgent.
So, what I see what I'm doing is
adding to
it, because there's a part of
the story that
we haven't focused on yet.
And it's the part of the story
of this generation
of African-American
decision-makers that came
in at the end of the civil
rights movement
and took office, became police
chiefs, became
prosecutors, became judges.
What were they doing during
the...
JEFFREY BROWN: Became the
attorney general.
You talk about Eric Holder.
JAMES FORMAN JR.: Absolutely,
who...
JEFFREY BROWN: Give us an
example, though,
I mean, of what -- a specific
example, like
Holder?
JAMES FORMAN JR.: Well, OK, so
somebody like
Eric Holder comes in as the U.S.
attorney
for the District of Columbia in
the early
1990s, and he gives a big speech
where he
says, crime and violence are
destroying our
communities.
He says, the black people of
D.C. are no more
free than the black people of
Selma, Alabama,
were in 1955.
But what's keeping us down,
what's keeping
us locked inside is crime and
violence and
criminal gangs.
So, in response to that, he
promoted a program
called Operation Cease-Fire,
where police
would stop cars on any pretext,
of a minor
traffic violation, speeding,
tinted windows,
you name it, because they wanted
to search
those cars for guns.
JEFFREY BROWN: So, with good
intention, the
best intentions, of protecting
the black community,
but you're suggesting all of
that helped foment
what's come in the mass
incarceration.
JAMES FORMAN JR.: Exactly.
I mean, the story -- my story is
a tragedy,
right, because it is a story of
best intentions
in many cases.
You have people, often, they
don't -- part
of the story is that people
didn't know what
was going to happen next.
So, in the 1970s, they chose not
to decriminalize
marijuana.
That was a big debate in D.C. at
the time.
And when -- they didn't do it.
And they said, well, it's not
that big of
a deal if we don't decriminalize
marijuana,
because nobody's really going to
prison, no
one's losing their job for a
marijuana conviction.
But then, later in the '80s and
in the '90s,
we passed laws that said you
can't get a student
loan, you can't get public
housing, you can't
get a job if you have a
marijuana conviction.
So, a decision they made at time
A later turns
out to have these devastating
effects.
JEFFREY BROWN: So, when and why
did these
attitudes change?
Or have they shifted
sufficiently?
JAMES FORMAN JR.: Well, they
have shifted
in part.
So, I think the big thing that's
happened
in the last few years -- and the
Black Lives
Matter movement is a part of
this, important
writers like Michelle Alexander
and Bryan
Stevenson and Ta-Nehisi Coates
have really
promoted this issue.
And attitudes in the black
community have
started to change, as people
more and more
see mass incarceration as a
racial justice
issue.
But one thing that hasn't
changed is, we still
don't really talk about people
who have committed
violent crimes.
When we say we're going to try
to reduce mass
incarceration, our whole focus
so far has
been on nonviolent drug
offenders.
And I argue in the book, that's
not going
far enough.
JEFFREY BROWN: Why is it
important to recognize
the role of African-Americans in
bringing
about mass incarceration?
You know, why is it important to
fill in or
tell the story, take the story
further the
way you have?
JAMES FORMAN JR.: Well, part of
it, honestly,
is, you know, I'm just that kind
of person
who, if I go to a movie, and
there's no black
characters, somebody asks me at
the end of
the movie, what did you think
about it, I
say, well, it was OK, but there
were -- there
were no -- where were the black
characters?
I mean, I think that black
people have been
central to every part of
American history.
And so I don't want to watch a
movie, I don't
want to read a book, I don't
want to study
history that doesn't show the
role that African-Americans
were playing.
So, that, to me, is really, at a
basic level,
the number one reason.
But it's also because,
factually, we were
there, right, in D.C., in
Atlanta, in Memphis,
in Los Angeles, in Chicago, in
New York.
You have substantial
African-American representation.
And I just don't think we can
write us out
of the picture.
JEFFREY BROWN: Let me ask you,
finally, I
mean, we started with a personal
story, you
as a public defender, talking
about the unfinished
work of the civil rights
movement.
You're also the son of a very
prominent civil
rights leader, James Forman.
Connect the dots for me, the
kind of work
as a public defender, but, more
importantly,
the mass incarceration problem
now to the
civil rights movement.
How do you see it?
JAMES FORMAN JR.: Well, they
have this similarity.
Both of them have -- that is to
say, Jim Crow
and mass incarceration both have
led to a
whole part of the population
being locked
out of opportunity by being
defined by a certain
status, either your race or the
fact that
you have a criminal conviction.
And that means you can't get a
job, you can't
get public housing, you can't
get student
loans, you can't live freely as
an American
citizen.
And so I think, really, what the
civil rights
movement was about was finding
the most acute
thing that was harming black
people, which
at the time was Jim Crow, and
responding.
And I see the movement to fight
mass incarceration
in much the same way today.
JEFFREY BROWN: All right, the
new book is
"Locking Up Our Own: Crime and
Punishment
in Black America,"
James Forman Jr., thank you very
much.
JAMES FORMAN JR.: Thank you.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Next, another
installment
of Brief But Spectacular, where
we ask interesting
people to describe their
passions.
Tonight, we hear from
illustrator Catia Chien
on what it means to create from
the inside
out.
Her latest picture book is
"Things to Do."
CATIA CHIEN, Artist: When I was
growing up,
I didn't actually have bedtime
stories or
anything like that.
I grew up in a pretty
dysfunctional family.
There was a lot of emotional
upheaval.
I did grow up with comics.
Comic books really gave me a way
out of that
loneliness.
There's this comic book
character named Monica.
It was a constant that I had in
my life.
I could read stories about
Monica and her
friends.
I thought that if I grew up and
I could do
that for another child, like,
that would be
worthwhile.
I definitely feel that I wasn't
seen when
I was a child.
When I moved to the U.S., I
didn't have a
voice.
English was difficult for me to
speak.
That was when I really connected
with the
value of art and expression.
There is a sense of wanting to
find belonging
when you have experiences of
being an outsider,
and wanting to create something
that feels
really true to yourself,because
you're constantly
comparing yourself to something
else, and
it doesn't quite match.
The process of creating from the
inside out,
it's really a process of
mattering.
When I teach, a lot of students
ask me like,
what do you use, what is your
tool, and stuff
like that.
It goes much deeper than that.
It goes into, like, who are you?
What do you actually want to
say?
What matters to you?
From that place, everything is
possible.
You will find a way to get it
out.
One of the best things that I
things that
I do with the kids is that I
say, let's all
close our eyes and all pretend
to be an illustrator.
I guide them through a series of
visual things
that they're experiencing
through their imagination.
So, when I did "A Boy and a
Jaguar," I had
them experience the jungle, and
they jump
into a lake, and then they look
in the lake,
and what's reflected back to
them is the face
of a jaguar.
There was this kid in the back
of the room
that was really loud and rowdy,
didn't want
anything to do with me.
And he raised his hand and he
said, "I didn't
know that I could go there."
That's the meaning of empathy, a
story that's
not your own that you can step
inside of.
That's empathy.
My family, in terms of how they
have responded
to my work, it's so practical.
You know, it has to do with
like, is that
paying you?
I have long ago understood that
that's not
where the gold is.
You know, you will chase that
forever, and
then, at the end of your life,
you think,
like, what have I done?
The feeling of actually
belonging, it's self-created.
Arriving at the process of
creating something
from the inside out, it's really
just a validation
of existing.
It matters that we add to the
conversation,
so it's not just one voice
that's being told
in picture books.
It matters.
My name is Catia Chien.
And this was my Brief But
Spectacular take
on creating from the inside out.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Find more of
our Brief But
Spectacular videos online at
PBS.org/NewsHour/Brief.
And again to our honor roll of
American service
personnel killed in Iraq and
Afghanistan.
We add them as their deaths are
made official
and photographs become
available.
Here, in silence, is one more.
And that's the "NewsHour" for
tonight.
I'm Hari Sreenivasan.
Join us online and again here
tomorrow evening
for an exclusive interview with
the secretary-general
of the United Nations and a
preview of the
French elections.
For all of us at the "PBS
NewsHour," thank
you, and good night.
For all of us at the "PBS
NewsHour," thank
you, and good night.